---
title: Blog_004 - Architecture and stocks
date: 2026-06-18
---

Last night the first signs of a complete workflow with the new model surfaced. I managed to get the model to a point that is similar enough to Llama3.1 for me to justify moving on to implementing it into the app itself. Having three models installed on my device, each with unique properties sparked the idea for the model selector inside TRG. Although there is no meaningful reason, currently, to alternate between models the prospect of being able to choose the underlying model opens up a world of opportunities worth exploring in the future. It can democratize the use of the application, making it available even for users with very limited hardware, and hard core users may connect much heavier models in order to do more advanced stuff.

I explored LFM's architecture, because I wanted to understand how it was able to produce results so much faster than Llama even though they had the same number of parameters. A few pages into the official technical paper for the model there is this diagram that outlines the architecture. Turns out that the "magic" is performed by clever use of a little, easy-to-miss, piece of the entire thing, the network router. LFM 2.5 - 8B is not based on the transformer architecture, but uses what's called a mixture of experts (MoE), with each expert being represented by 1.5B parameters. The router decides which expert is best for the task in hand and hence, only that one is fired up, resulting in faster response times. This is high level stuff of course, and once again I found myself with more questions than answers, it was interesting none the less. In terms of numbers, the model has vocabulary size of 128k, and the embedding layer has about 262M parameters, which is 3.1% of 8B and 17.5% of 1.5B.

On a completely different note, today SpaceX's stock took its first major drop since its release about a week ago. I don't live under a rock and for the past couple of years I've been interested in the stock market, and it never stops to amaze me. I haven't studied finance, mainly following major news outlets, reading the headlines and generally observing what's happening. I know enough to understand that I have absolutely no chance at competing with professionals when it comes to investing in single stocks and I prefer to invest whatever part of my income I can into other things. All of these to say that, in general and over the two past months in particular, I fail miserably in trying to explain what's happening with a stock's price. The entire concept is so arbitrary and volatile that short-term it completely loses meaning. How is it that a single tweet from a country's president can shift the price of an oil barrel (in the stock market) and why do we even care about that price when on the day-to-day we see gas prices rising and stabilizing on a 15-20% increase? Why do people valuate AI companies with no profit in the billions when everyone seems to be building a slightly different version of the same thing? Why does the stock price of a company that has spent most of its existence building missiles, sending cars in orbit, and manufacturing off-the-grid internet infrastructure, double since it just announced that all of a sudden it is an AI company now?? None of the previous sentences make sense, perhaps because none of the original material it is based upon makes no sense either. It's frustrating yes, but I guess it's not worth obsessing over.