---
title: Blog_017 - They are listening to us
date: 2026-07-01
---

This blog post was inspired by a recent article published on Unboxholics.com were the author after conducting research presents their findings regarding the common thought of "our phones are listening to us". I'm sure it has come up in conversations that everyone has had, and I am not an exception to this. People who know me personally are more than likely to have discussed this with me, and I would like to type a few words and put my findings on the internet too. The topic also expands to conspiracy theories about authoritarian figures who intentionally "spy" on regular people in various ways. I am pretty confident that there were articles written regarding spying chips being injected inside us via vaccines for the recent pandemic. For Greece, the latest installment of this was a frenzy regarding the new-form ids that people were forced to print. It is important to note here that not all conspiracies are work of fiction, since there have been documented cases of powerful authorities, like the government, were indeed caught eavesdropping on certain figures. 

The author of the article gives a very definitive answer, our phones are not actively listening to us all the time. This process is too computationally expensive to take place for every single one of us, at all times. This is true both for on-device and cloud approaches. It's not worth it doing it this way and it would be risky in many different ways. I totally agree with them. However, there is no denying that we have all experienced a few "freaky" real scenarios where the algorithm read our mind. Maybe you are just thinking about buying an item and an ad about it pops-up. Maybe you just glanced at a new shop on your commute and you see an Instagram reel about it first thing on your landing page as soon as you open the app after the commute. There is no denying that these actually happen, but explaining these phenomena is actually a lot simpler than you think.

Think of the first thing you do as soon as you install a new app, sign-up for a service or simply visit a site. Before you even get a glimpse, you are prompted to agree to their terms, click to confirm that you've read their legal documents, accept all or some of the cookies. It is the price you pay for accessing otherwise free content. For applications it is a bit more complicated, in the EU at least, the developer must ask for your permission to access some more things. Your maps application for example needs your location to function, Instagram needs access to your library if you want to use to upload content from your device, I am sure we can all come up with a few more examples. 

As the article's authors suggests, all these "agreements" that you make, is basically allowing companies to access your data. What you do while using their app / service / website is recorded and tracked in chronological order. This data forms your "profile", not the one you share with others, the one that a company keeps about you. I would suggest, with great confidence, that for the overwhelming majority of cases nothing creepy is happening. Companies will use this data to show content more relevant to you, and most importantly show you ads about products that you have a higher chance of purchasing. That's it. 

Well... sort of. The business of selling people's time, attention and information is huge, it's probably bigger than anything else. This has allowed for extreme amounts of money to flow through companies, which encourages constant development of highly effective algorithms that aim to maximize the time you'll spend on a platform and maximize the probability of you actually buying something from an ad. This has resulted in some of the most sophisticated algorithms we have ever seen. Models and systems that are more capable than any human in predicting people's behavior and future needs. A very famous story is the one of Amazon knowing about a woman's pregnancy even before her parents knew. It could do that because it was sophisticated enough to recognize a change of pattern in the woman's purchasing habits and successfully predicted that this change indicates a pregnancy. 

It can be argued that it has not been all so innocent. There have been many documented cases that people's data has been used for much, much, worse things than simply selling more stuff. Huge scandals regarding targeted election campaigns, collecting people's medical information and selling this data for highly targeted and specialized medication ads etc. Truly awful stuff. However, the algorithm and big companies are much less like the ever looming eye of the big-brother, by the book of "1984", and much more like the greedy-pigs from the "Animal Farm"

Going back to my point, companies do not need to actively listen to you without you knowing. They already have your signed agreement to track your actions while you use their stuff. This information is then used to form a profile and prediction algorithms will feed you with whatever they think is the best for what the company is trying to achieve with their product. 

What is more, and this is something that most people (including the article's author) miss, is that aside from having a profile about you, companies will create groups of people with which you have something in common. Think of family members, colleagues, friends. People that you actively spend time together, not just people you connect with on a social media platform. 

Back when I was doing my masters one of the assignments that my class was given, was to take a dataset and figure out such groups. The dataset contained no information on people. It was a long list of devices (in the form of a mac address) connecting to IPs at a specific time. Imagine a 100.000 lines long excel file with just these 3 columns. Using this information and a clever algorithmic work you could very accurately come up with many interesting things, including but not limited to:
- which devices belong in groups, 
- predict what the type of a group, 
- find out about group actions (such as a family going on vacation) 
- predict the type of each device. 
What this assignment proved to us is, first, that companies require very little information about us to achieve their goal, and second that groups are very important in explaining some of the freaky stuff I mentioned earlier.
Think of the following scenario. You are having lunch with your colleagues and one of you mentions kangaroos. You do not live in Australia so a kangaroo is not part of your life. You come back from lunch and when you open a social media platform there is a kangaroo video right there! What happened? The most probable case is that someone from your group searched about the kangaroo, the algorithm picked that, combined it with the fact that it knew that you are a colleague of that person, makes the assumption that kangaroos came up during one of your conversations and it serves it to you thinking that you will be interested and spent more time on the app.

The last point that I would like to make is that the phenomenon is much less prominent than we think. Yes, we've all experienced it, but it is rare. I do not know about you but most of the time I am getting very bad suggestions, especially when it comes to ads. Most ads I get are annoying, they do not advertise something that I am even remotely likely to buy, and fail to grab my attention for more than a second. At the same time I may realize that ad campaigns for products that I would actually be interested in, and that I had actually searched on the internet for in the past, never reach me and I end up losing a good promotional deal. It is normal to think that it is more relevant than it actually is because when it happens, it's shocking. We remember most, if not all, instances of this phenomenon happening but we also completely forget the many more times it did not happen. I know that the experience will vary from individual to individual. I am also someone that lives in the EU, and I tend to be a bit more mindful when it comes to cookies and application privileges. Don't get me wrong, I am not perfect, but I am somewhat cautious. The algorithms are sophisticated, that's a certainty, it is the reason why we keep coming back, but at the same time they are wrong more times than we think.