---
title: Blog_016 - Cloudy thoughts
date: 2026-06-30
---

You ever get this feeling of not being able to explain something to someone? No matter how hard you try, how many examples you use, they just don't seem to "get it". It's funny for a while but then you might get irritated. You are angry at them. You are angry with yourself. They can't understand you. You listen to yourself and words start to lose meaning. Mid-sentence you may realize that what you are actually saying does not make any sense. You pause. You use a lot of "ehhhm", "uhhmm". You start again, you lose it again. Suddenly, this thing that you thought you knew feels strange. You think you are an idiot (you are not). It's frustrating.

A few weeks ago I had to train a colleague of mine. I thought that I was more than capable of doing that. I had spent every day of the past six months doing what I would now teach him how to do. I had created a proper documentation as a resource. I was confident that I understood every part of it, so much so that there was no question that he could ask me that I did not have the answer to. We did not have much time to do the training, only one and a half days. I thought I did a great job. Over the next few days he would call me 10-20 times for clarifying questions and then after a while of silence, having grasped what I was trying to teach him, he now tells me "I did not understand you during training, you should have explained it better".

I was on a walk with my girlfriend yesterday. She does her masters on AI at the moment and she just got off presenting a research paper to her colleagues and professor. I wanted to find out more, I am interested in cutting-edge AI research too you see, so I was asking a few questions. After going back and forth for a while I realized that although I had grasped bits here and there, the wider image was blurry to me, like having some noise in your data. I told her that, and she said "I am a bit chaotic when I try to explain some things, I am sorry" to which she followed with "it's all cloudy in my mind". She is very smart and extremely hard-working, so I knew that she understood what she was trying to explain to me. 

Many great minds of this world have all said something along the lines of "the best way to understand something is trying to teach it to someone else". Being able to describe complex concepts in a few, simple words has always been admired. The more people that can understand what you are saying the greater its impact. I have a bachelor in Physics. Some of the greatest scientific achievements were explained to us in a sentence or two. The physical principles, the things that all greats based their complex work on (let's look at it from first principles you would hear people say), they were simple sentences that anyone can understand. Throughout my academic career, I saw people trying to reduce their sentences down to their absolute minimum. I watched as some people failed and I stood in awe, captivated, by people who nailed the concept. In the moment, you feel like you understand everything, it feels like an accomplishment in it of itself, and most importantly it makes you feel good. You feel smart and powerful. Reality will kick in later, but for a sort moment it's magic. 

We called the latter group names such as "sharp" and "detailed", someone that has honed in his skills, someone that makes it look easy. You'll hear it in other things apart from academia. An experienced skilled painter will make the process of painting a landscape appear easy. Everyone could "understand" Bob Ross' stokes with his brush, that is what made him such a huge hit. You'll see it in sports too. People running, jumping, scoring the ball, back-flipping, racing at 300+ kph, making it look effortless.  In tech it's the same. You can tell when someone know their stuff. It's direct and to-the-point. It's confidence inspiring. 

Truly inspiring stuff but how does one actually gets rid off cloudy thoughts and starts being "sharp"?