---
title: Blog_005 - Maintenance
date: 2026-06-19
---

In software development, maintenance is a nightmare most of the times. You want to start working a new feature, you get the thrill of problem solving, you translate your pen-and-paper notes to code. You walk your way through the errors and finally the new feature works! Code is pushed to the repo and merged with the main branch. You are the hero once again, sitting and starring proudly at your fully working application. This is repeated a few more times. The more features the more value for your users. Months go by and you want to upgrade your project with a new shinny library that promises 30% better performance. You install it, tell your coding agent to implement the change, it passes the first few tests but then it breaks. No big deal, you are the hero after all, you make a few changes yourself (because a hero must get their hands dirty from time to time and it will feel better this way) and you stumble on a bug, upon another bug upon another. You panic! 

Turns out that if you do arbitrary new feature development for your application, without implementing a proper maintenance strategy, leaves you with a code base that is the software equivalent of duck-taping through a garage project. It holds together fine but hell breaks lose if you so much as think about changing something. There is no option other than to painstakingly go through your code base, attempting to understand it and you refactor along the way. I don't think there is anyone that enjoys refactoring their code, but its necessary and if your code is maintained periodically you are set to suffering a lot less in the future.  

For me, the fear of having to live out this nightmare scenario is ever more present with our current software development workflow. With the help of AI we code exponentially faster than before. As I was discussing yesterday with a mate of mine, artificial intelligence is not at a stage where it can successfully replace people, but it is at the point where it makes capable and knowledgeable people way faster, increasing their code production. More code means more duck-taping and more things that can go wrong if you set in motion the dependency domino. I believe that it is more important than ever before to implement a concrete maintenance strategy, regardless if you are working solo or on a team. We need tests and QA to validate the results we are getting from AI, make sure that they follow our guidelines, and save us from having to go through a nightmare in the future.

Similarly, when you need to take care of a house, it is crucial that you implement a maintenance strategy, with test cases and all. For me, today is the most important maintenance day, because it is Friday and on Fridays I go food shopping and food is of utmost importance! We need to maintain a constant flow of consumables inside the house. Strike the balance between cost-effectiveness and quality. Shop seasonally and sustainably. For me, this translates into a few trips with a motorcycle, because parking is hell in Athens. A local farmer's market for vegetables, a super market with great prices for groceries and exploring my options when it comes to buying meat. The whole thing is built upon a dynamic shopping list that's developed over the week and resets every Friday. Last minute shopping lists fail every single time. 

Just like a project, a house has more than one features, other than food. So things like doing chores, deep cleaning and other maintenance work must happen on a regular basis too. The similarities are more apparent when we reach a point of failure. The domino effect is present here as well. Refactoring will not take as long, problem solving is less complex but it can surely knock you off balance for a couple of weeks, leaving you with a constant feeling of frustration.